One must suffer to be beautiful.
—French Proverb Women must labour to be beautiful.
—W. B. Yeats Unto the woman He said, I will greatly multiply thy pain and thy travail; in pain thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
—Genesis 3:16 makes women’s bodies hurt them, and makes women hurt their bodies. Studies of abusers show that violence, once begun, escalates. Cosmetic surgery is the fastest-growing “medical” specialty. More than two million Americans, at least 87 percent of them female, had undergone it by 1988, a figure that had tripled in two years. Throughout the 1980s, as women gained power, unprecedented numbers of them sought out and submitted to the knife. Why surgery? Why now?
From the beginning of their history until just before the 1960s, women’s gender caused them pain. Because of puerperal fever and childbed complications, giving birth was cruelly painful until the invention of chloroform in 1860, and mortally dangerous until the advent of antisepsis in the 1880s. Afterward, sex still carried the risk of an illegal abortion, with its dangers of hemorrhage, perforated uterus, and death by blood poisoning. “Labor” for women has meant childbirth, so that work, sex, love, pain, and death, over the centuries, intertwined into a living knot at the center of female consciousness: Love hurt, sex could kill, a woman’s painful labor was a labor of love. What would be masochism in a man has meant survival for a woman.
began to lose its sting in 1965, when in the case of Griswold v.
Connecticut the U.S. Supreme Court legalized the sale of contraceptives and the Pill was widely prescribed. It hurt even less from the late 1960s until the late 1980s, when safe abortion was legalized in most Western countries. As women entered the paid work force and lost their dependence on sexual barter for survival, it hurt less still. Changing social mores and the women’s movement’s championing of female sexuality began to make it imaginable that the pleasure their sex gave women might finally and forever outweigh the pain. The strands of sex and pain in women at last began to separate.
In the strange new absence of female pain, the myth put beauty in its place. For as far back as women could remember, something had hurt about being female. As of a generation ago, that became less and less true. But neither women nor the masculine social order could adapt so abruptly to a present in which femaleness was not characterized and defined by pain. Today, what hurts is beauty.
Many women took on this new version of pain exacted by beauty stoically because freedom from sexual pain left a gap in female identity.
Women were expected, and expected themselves, to conform to freedom effortlessly, with superhuman resilience. But freedom is not learned easily overnight. One generation is not long enough to forget five millennia of learning how to bear being hurt. If a woman’s sexual sense of self has centered on pain as far back as the record goes, who is she without it? If suffering is beauty and beauty is love, she cannot be sure she will be loved if she does not suffer. It is hard, because of such conditioning, to envisage a female body free of pain and still desirable.
Even aside from the biological pain of women’s gender, modern women are just recovering from our long experience of man-made punishment for pleasure. The Greek lawmaker Solon ruled that an unmarried woman caught in a sexual act could be sold into slavery; the emperor Constantine decreed that a virgin who had willingly fornicated must be burned (her penalty was lighter if she had been raped); death was the price a free woman paid for making love with a slave. The laws of Romulus gave a husband the right to kill his adulterous wife. Adulteresses in modern Saudi Arabia are stoned to death. Resistance to the abortifacient pill RU428 derives partly from its relative painlessness. Antiabortion activists often make exceptions for rape and incest, which suggests that it is her desire for sex for which a woman must pay with her pain. And many women, from a memory that extends back through endless mothers, are inclined consciously or not to agree.
Cosmetic surgery processes the bodies of woman-made women, who make up the vast majority of its patient pool, into man-made women.
It took over the regions of the female mind left unpoliced when female sexuality stopped hurting, and exploited our willingness to heed an authoritarian voice that announces—as we uneasily try out the alien state of the pain-free women—Not so fast.
The Walking Wounded The cosmetic surgery industry is expanding by manipulating ideas of health and sickness. There is a clear historical precedent for what the surgeons are doing. “Healthy” and “diseased,” as Susan Sontag points out in Illness as Metaphor, are often subjective judgments that society makes for its own purposes. Women have long been defined as sick as a means of subjecting them to social control. What the modern Surgical Age is doing to women is an overt reenactment of what nineteenthcentury medicine did to make well women sick and active women passive. The surgical industry has taken over for its own profit motives the ancient medical attitude, which harks back to classical Greece but reached its high point in the Victorian female cult of invalidism, which defines normal, healthy female physiology, drives, and desires as pathological. “In the traditions of Western thought,” write Deirdre English and Barbara Ehrenreich in Complaints and Disorders: The ual Politics of Sickness, “man represents wholeness, strength and health. Woman is a ‘misbegotten man,’ weak and incomplete.” Historian Jules Michelet refers to women as “the walking wounded.” The relation of doctors to women has been less than straightforward for most of their history. Healing and tending the sick were primarily female skills until the Enlightenment; women’s medical effectiveness was one catalyst for the witch burnings that swept Europe from the fourteenth to the eighteenth centuries. But the ascent of science and the exclusion of women healers from the childbed are connected, and the professionalization of medicine in the nineteenth century deliberately barred women from their traditional healing role.
The Surgical Age took over from the institutionalization of female “mental illness,” which had in turn overtaken the institutionalization of nineteenth-century hysteria, each phase of medical coercion consistently finding new ways to determine that what is female is sick. As English and Ehrenreich put it: “Medicine’s prime contribution to sexist ideology has been to describe women as sick, and as potentially sickening to men.” The “vital lie” that equates femaleness with disease has benefited doctors in each of these three phases of medical history, guaranteeing them “sick” and profitable patients wherever middleclass women can be found. The old edifice of medical coercion of women, temporarily weakened when women entered medical schools in significant numbers, has gained reinforcements from the beauty doctors of the Surgical Age.
The parallels between the two systems are remarkable. Both arose to answer the need for an ideology that could debilitate and discredit middle-class women whose education, leisure, and freedom from material constraints might lead them too far into a dangerous emancipation and participation in public life. From 1848 until the enfranchisement of Western women in the first decades of the twentieth century was a time of feminist agitation of unsurpassed intensity, and the “Woman Question” was a continuing social crisis: in backlash, a new ideal of the “separate sphere” of total domesticity arose. That ideal came, like the beauty myth in a parallel backlash against women’s advancement, with its socially useful price: the cult of female invalidism, initiated by “a constriction in the field of vision which led doctors to focus, with obsessive concern, on women as organs of reproduction…a distortion of perception which, by placing primary emphasis on the sexual organs, enabled men to view women as a creature apart.” Showalter also notes that during the decades from 1870 to 1910, middle-class women were beginning to organize in behalf of higher education, entrance to the professions, and political rights. Simultaneously, the female nervous disorders of anorexia nervosa, hysteria, and neurasthenia became epidemic; and the Darwinian “nerve specialist” arose to dictate proper feminine behavior outside the asylum as well as in…and to oppose women’s efforts to change the conditions of their lives.
The Victorian woman became her ovaries, as today’s woman has become her “beauty.” Her reproductive value, as the “aesthetic” value of her face and body today, “came to be seen as a sacred trust, one that she must constantly guard in the interest of her race.” Where Victorian doctors helped support a culture that needed to view women through ovarian determinism, modern cosmetic surgeons do the same for society by creating a system of beauty determinism. In the last century, notes Showalter, “women were the primary patients in surgical clinics, water-cure establishments, and rest-cure homes; they flocked to the new specialists in the ‘female illnesses’ of hysteria and neurasthenia, as well as marginal therapies, i.e., ‘mesmeric healing,’” just as women are the primary patients of “beauty therapies” in the current backlash. These attitudes, in both ideologies, allow doctors to act as a vanguard in imposing upon women what society needs from them.
Health Both the Victorian and the modern medical systems reclassify aspects of healthy femaleness into grotesque abnormality. Victorian medicine “treated pregnancy and menopause as diseases, menstruation as a chronic disorder, childbirth as a surgical event.” A menstruating woman was treated with purgatives, forced medicines, hip baths, and leeches. The regulation of menstruation was pursued obsessively, just as the regulation of women’s fat is today: “The proper establishment of the menstrual function was viewed as essential to female mental health, not only for the adolescent years but for the woman’s entire life-span. Menarche was”—as the weight gain of puberty is now considered to be—“the first stage of mortal danger.” Maintaining reproduction, like the maintenance of “beauty,” was seen as the allimportant female function threatened by the woman’s moral laxness and mental chaos: Just as they do today, doctors then helped the Victorian woman maintain her “stability in the face of almost overwhelming physical odds,” and enforced in her “those qualities of self-government and industriousness that would help a woman resist the stresses of her body and the weakness of her female nature.” With the advent of the Victorian women’s doctor, the earlier religious rationale for calling women morally sick was changed into a biomedical one. That in turn has changed into an “aesthetic” one, bringing us full circle. Our rationale is even more subjective than the “vital lie” of the Victorians. While their medical terminology had at least to gesture at “objectivity,” today’s aesthetic judgments about who is sick and who is well are as impossible to prove, as easy to manipulate, as a belief about the stain on a woman’s soul. And the modern reclassification makes more money: A woman who thought she was sick with femaleness couldn’t buy an ultimate cure for her gender. But a woman who thinks she is sick with female ugliness is now being persuaded that she can.
The nineteenth-century version of medical coercion looks quaint to us: How could women have been made to believe that menstruation, masturbation, pregnancy, and menopause were diseases? But as modern women are being asked to believe that parts of our normal, healthy bodies are diseased, we have entered a new phase of medical coercion that is so horrific that no one wants to look at it at all.
The reclassification of well and beautiful women as sick and ugly women is taking place without hindrance. Since the nineteenth century, society has tacitly supported efforts of the medical profession to confine women’s lives through versions of this reclassification. Since it is socially necessary work, now as in the last century, fewer reality checks apply to this than are applied to medical practices in general; the media is tolerant or supportive; and the main functionaries, whose work benefits the social order, are unusually highly compensated.
The purpose of the Victorian cult of female invalidism was social control. It too was a double symbol, like “beauty”: Subjectively, women invalids exerted through it the little power they had, escaped onerous sexual demands and dangerous childbirth, and received attention from responsive doctors. But for the establishment, it was a political solution as useful as the Iron Maiden. As French writer Catherine Clément puts it: “Hysteria [was] tolerated because in fact it has no power to effect cultural change; it is much safer for the patriarchal order to encourage and allow discontented women to express their wrongs through psychosomatic illness than to have them agitating for economic and legal rights.” Social pressure demanded that leisured, educated, middleclass women preempt trouble by being sick, and the enforced hypochondria felt to the sufferer like real illness. For similar reasons today, social pressure requires that women preempt the implications of our recent claim to our bodies by feeling ugly, and that forcibly lowered self-esteem looks to the sufferer like real “ugliness.” The surgeons are taking the feminist redefinition of health as beauty and perverting it into a notion of “beauty” as health; and, thus, of whatever they are selling as health: hunger as health, pain and bloodshed as health. Anguish and illness have been “beauty” before: In the nineteenth century, the tubercular woman—with her glittering eyes, pearly skin, and fevered lips—was the ideal. Gender and Stress describes the media’s idealization of anorexics; the iconography of the Victorians idealized “beautiful” hysterics fainting in front of male doctors, asylum doctors dwelt lasciviously on the wasted bodies of anorexics in their care, and later psychiatric handbooks ask doctors to admire the “calm and beautiful face” of the anesthetized woman who has undergone electroshock therapy. Like current coverage by women’s journalism of the surgical ideal, Victorian journalism aimed at women waxed lyrical on the sentimental attractiveness of feminine debility, invalidism, and death.
A century ago, normal female activity, especially the kind that would lead women into power, was classified as ugly and sick. If a woman read too much, her uterus would “atrophy.” If she kept on reading, her reproductive system would collapse and, according to the medical commentary of the day, “we should have before us a repulsive and useless hybrid.” Menopause was depicted as a terminal blow, “the death of the woman in the woman”: “The end of a woman’s reproductive life was as profound a mental upheaval as the beginning,” producing, like the modern waning of “beauty,” “a distinct shock to the brain.” Then as now, though with a different rationalization, menopause was represented as causing the feeling that “the world…is turned upside down, that everything is changed, or that some very dreadful but undefined calamity has happened or is about to happen.” Participation in modernity, education, and employment was portrayed as making Victorian women ill: “warm apartments, coal-fires, gas-lights, late hours, rich food,” turned them into invalids, as today, as the skin cream copy puts it, “central heating, air pollution, fluorescent lights, etc.” make us “ugly.” Victorians protested women’s higher education by fervidly imagining the damage it would do to their reproductive organs; Friedrich Engels claimed that “protracted work frequently causes deformities of the pelvis,” and it was taken for granted that “the education of women would sterilize them” and make them sexually unattractive: “When a woman displays scientific interest, then there is something out of order in her sexuality.” The Victorians insisted that freedom from the “separate sphere” impaired womanhood, just as we are asked to believe that freedom from the beauty myth impairs beauty.
Vital lies are resilient. Contraception, for example, is defined by the medical profession, depending on the social mood, as making women ill or “beautiful”: Victorian doctors claimed that any contraception caused “galloping cancer, sterility and nymphomania in women;…the practise was likely to produce mania leading to suicide.” Until the 1920s, it was considered “distinctly dangerous to health,” sterility and “mental degeneration in subsequent offspring” being among its supposed effects. But when society needed sexually available women, although questions about safety and side effects arose at once, women’s magazines nonetheless ran enthusiastic stories suggesting that the Pill would keep women young, and make them more “sexy.” In the same way, surgeons—and women’s magazines, increasingly dependent on the editorial copy and ad revenue the surgeons provide—are recasting freedom from the beauty myth as disease. Advertisements for holy oils initiated this new definition by imitating medical journalism’s photographs of “disease” and “cure.” They drew on the worst medical fears of the age, postnuclear cancers and AIDS.
“Crow’s feet” sounds insignificant compared with the suggestions the ads made of radiation sickness and carcinogenic lesions, cellular chaos and lowered immune systems. Elizabeth Arden’s is “the most advanced treatment system of the century,” as if aging required chemotherapy.
Estée Lauder’s “science-proven” Night Repair is applied with a medical syringe and rubber balloon, like a blood transfusion or a liquid drug.
Vichy lets your skin “recuperate.” Clarins talks of “relapse.” Elancyl speaks of fat as a “condition” that “disfigures.” Doctors give prescriptions, Clarins a “Beauty Prescription,” and Clinique, “Prescriptives.” Cancer specialists speak of the “regression” of the illness; so does Clinique: “Stay with your treatment—the temporary ‘regression’ will stop.” Ultima II makes Megadose.
In 1985, Eugenia Chandris in The Venus Syndrome called big hips and thighs “a medical problem”; looking at the Paleolithic fertility figures, she committed the solecism of saying that “the problem has troubled women ever since.” “The problem,” of course, has only troubled women since it has been called a problem—that is, within living memory. Female fat is characterized as if it were not only dead, but carcinogenic: “proliferating cells,” breeding more death. The Victorians defined all reproductive activity as illness; today’s beauty surgeons define as illness all evidence on the body of its reproductive activity—stretch marks, sagging breasts, breasts that have nursed, and the postpartum weight that accumulates, in every culture, at about ten pounds per pregnancy.
Education, of course, never affected a woman’s ovaries, just as maternal breasts lose no feeling; nursing is erotic.
Nor are they dysfunctional; to the contrary, they have fulfilled a primary function of the breast, lactation. But cosmetic surgeons describe postpartum breasts, as the Victorians described educated ovaries, as “atrophied,” a term that healing doctors use to describe the wasted, dysfunctional muscles of paralysis. They reclassify healthy adult female flesh as “cellulite,” an invented “condition” that was imported into the United States by Vogue only in 1973; they refer to this texture as “disfiguring,” “unsightly,” “polluted with toxins.” Before 1973, it was normal female flesh.
Health makes good propaganda. “‘Proof’ that women’s activities outside the home are detrimental to the health and welfare of themselves, their families and the country as a whole” lent impetus, writes Ann Oakley, to the nineteenth-century cult of domesticity. The ovaries were seen as collective property rather than the woman’s own business, as the face and the body outline are seen today. Who can argue with health?
Institutionalized Reclassification Respected institutions are participating, as they did in the last century, in this cultural policing of women through reclassification: In 1978, the American Medical Association made the claim that preoccupation with beauty was the same as preoccupation with health. Dr. Arthur K. Balin, president of the American Aging Association, declared to The New York Times that “it would benefit physicians to look upon ugliness not as a cosmetic issue but a disease.” In professional plastic surgery journals, it is impossible to see where the surgeons differentiate between the cutting open of the cancerous and the healthy breast. Dr. Daniel C.
Tostesen of Harvard Medical School, who has accepted $85 million from Shiseido for research, is earning his salary on its behalf: There is, he asserts, a “subtle and continuous gradation” between health and medical interests on the one hand, and “beauty and well-being” on the other. Such dicta affect women more than men, as they are meant to; it is women who are the main surgical patient pool and the buyers of Shiseido products (no mention is made of the physical appeal, or lack of it, of Drs. Balin and Tostesen). When the surgeons convene conferences to discuss “the deformities of the aging face,” the profile on the announcement is invariably female.
A man is “deformed” if a limb or feature is missing or severely skewed from the human phenotype. Where women do not fit the Iron Maiden, we are now being called monstrous, and the Iron Maiden is exactly that which no woman fits, or fits forever. A woman is being asked to feel like a monster now though she is whole and fully physically functional. The surgeons are playing on the myth’s double standard for the function of the body. A man’s thigh is for walking, but a woman’s is for walking and looking “beautiful.” If women can walk but believe our limbs look wrong, we feel that their bodies cannot do what they are meant to do; we feel as genuinely deformed and disabled as the unwilling Victorian hypochondriac felt ill.
The tragedy of this reclassification is that for most of our history, women have indeed suffered from illness—prolapsed uteri, early death from ovarian cysts, untreatable venereal diseases and vaginal infections; poor hygiene, ignorance, shame, and compulsory yearly pregnancy took their toll. Compared with that, women are now miraculously, unprecedentedly well—but the myth denies us the experience of our wellness. Only a generation after the physical dis-ease of femaleness had ended, the new possibility of ease in the female body was ruined for women by the beauty myth.
Recycled rhetoric about female disease insults women’s healthy bodies: When a modern woman is blessed with a body that can move, run, dance, play, and bring her to orgasm; with breasts free of cancer, a healthy uterus, a life twice as long as that of the average Victorian woman, long enough to let her express her character on her face; with enough to eat and a metabolism that protects her by laying down flesh where and when she needs it; now that hers is the gift of health and well-being beyond that which any generation of women could have hoped for before—the Age of Surgery undoes her immense good fortune. It breaks down into defective components the gift of her sentient, vital body and the individuality of her face, teaching her to experience her lifelong blessing as a lifelong curse.
As a result, fully able women may now be less satisfied with their bodies than are disabled people: “Physically handicapped people,” reports a recent study quoted in The New York Times, “generally express an overall satisfaction about their bodies”—while able-bodied women, we saw, do not. One San Francisco Bay area woman in four would undergo cosmetic surgery given the chance. The word “deformed” is no longer used in polite discourse, except to describe bodies and faces of healthy normal women, where cosmetic surgeons’ language constructs out of us the new freak show.
Is “Health” Healthful?
How healthy is the Surgical Age? Smoking is on the decline in all groups but young women; 39 percent of all women who smoke say they smoke to maintain their weight; one quarter of those will die of disease caused by cigarette smoking—though, to be fair, the dead women’s corpses will weigh on average four pounds less than will the bodies of the living nonsmokers. Capri cigarettes are advertised as “the slimmest slim.” The late Rose Cipollone, whose husband sued the tobacco industry for her death from lung cancer, started smoking as a teenager because “I thought I was going to be glamorous or beautiful.” Liquid fasts have caused at least sixty deaths in the United States, and their side effects include nausea, hair loss, dizziness, and depression.
Compulsive exercise causes sports anemia and stunted growth. Breast implants make cancer detection more difficult. Women delay mammograms for fear of losing a breast and becoming “only half a woman.” The myth is not only making women physically ill, but mentally ill.
Attie and Brooks-Gunn in Gender and Stress assert that dieting is a chronic cause of stress in women; stress is one of the most serious medical risk factors, lowering the immune system and contributing to high blood pressure, heart disease, and higher mortality rates from cancer. But even worse, the beauty myth in the Surgical Age actually duplicates within women’s consciousness the classic symptoms of mental illness.
Schizophrenics are characterized by a disturbed sense of body boundaries. A neurotic’s body image is erratic, extremely negative or positive. Narcissists feel that what happens to their bodies does not happen to them. Psychotics have the feeling that parts of their body are falling apart. They display repetitive rubbing, self-mutilation, and fears of sliding into nothingness and disintegration. Surgical expectations and weight fluctuations subject women to weak body boundaries. The stress on appearance gives them erratic, extremely negative or positive views of themselves. A torrent of media images show the female face and body split into pieces, which is how the beauty myth asks a woman to think of her own body parts. A number of beauty practices require of her repetitive rubbing and self-mutilation. When she ages, she is asked to believe that without “beauty” she slides into nothingness and disintegration. Is it possible that by submitting women to the experiences symptomatic of mental illness, we are more likely to become mentally ill? Women are the majority of sufferers from mental illness by a significant majority.
But these facts are not very useful to women, because there is a double standard for “health” in men and women. Women are not getting it wrong when they smoke to lose weight. Our society does reward beauty on the outside over health on the inside. Women must not be blamed for choosing short-term beauty “fixes” that harm our long-term health, since our life spans are inverted under the beauty myth, and there is no great social or economic incentive for women to live a long time. A thin young woman with precancerous lungs is more highly rewarded socially than a hearty old crone. Spokespeople sell women the Iron Maiden and name her “Health”; if public discourse were really concerned with women’s health, it would turn angrily upon this aspect of the beauty myth.
The prime of life, the decades from forty to sixty—when many men but certainly most women are at the height of their powers—are cast as men’s peak and women’s decline (an especially sharp irony since those years represent women’s sexual peak and men’s sexual decline).
This double standard is not based on health differences between middleaged men and women, but on the artificial inequality of the beauty myth. The hypocrisy of the use of “health” as a gloss for the Surgical Age is that the myth’s true message is that a woman should live hungry, die young, and leave a pretty corpse.
The Surgical Age’s definition of female “health” is not healthy. Are those aspects defined as “diseased” actually sick?
You could see the signs of female aging as diseased, especially if you had a vested interest in making women too see them your way. Or you could see that if a woman is healthy she lives to grow old; as she thrives, she reacts and speaks and shows emotion, and grows into her face.
Lines trace her thought and radiate from the corners of her eyes after decades of laughter, closing together like fans as she smiles. You could call the lines a network of “serious lesions,” or you could see that in a precise calligraphy, thought has etched marks of concentration between her brows, and drawn across her forehead the horizontal creases of surprise, delight, compassion, and good talk. A lifetime of kissing, of speaking and weeping, shows expressively around a mouth scored like a leaf in motion. The skin loosens on her face and throat, giving her features a setting of sensual dignity; her features grow stronger as she does. She has looked around in her life, and it shows. When gray and white reflect in her hair, you could call it a dirty secret or you could call it silver or moonlight. Her body fills into itself, taking on gravity like a bather breasting water, growing generous with the rest of her. The darkening under her eyes, the weight of her lids, their minute crosshatching, reveal that what she has been part of has left in her its complexity and richness. She is darker, stronger, looser, tougher, sexier.
The maturing of a woman who has continued to grow is a beautiful thing to behold.
Or, if your ad revenue or your seven-figure salary or your privileged sexual status depend on it, it is an operable condition.
If you could make a million dollars a year—the average income of cosmetic surgeons in the United States—by doing so, then female fat can easily enough be called a disease. Or it can be seen for what it is: normal, since even the thinnest healthy women have more fat than men.
When you see the way women’s curves swell at the hips and again at the thighs, you could claim that that is an abnormal deformity. Or you could tell the truth: 75 percent of women are shaped like that, and soft, rounded hips and thighs and bellies were perceived as desirable and sensual without question until women got the vote. Women’s flesh, you could acknowledge, is textured, rippled, dense, and complicated; and the way fat is laid down on female muscle, on the hips and thighs that cradle and deliver children and open for sex, is one of the most provocative qualities of the female body. Or you could turn this too into an operable condition.
Whatever is deeply, essentially female—the life in a woman’s expression, the feel of her flesh, the shape of her breasts, the transformations after childbirth of her skin—is being reclassified as ugly, and ugliness as disease. These qualities are about an intensification of female power, which explains why they are being recast as a diminution of power. At least a third of a woman’s life is marked with aging; about a third of her body is made of fat. Both symbols are being transformed into operable conditions—so that women will only feel healthy if we are two thirds of the women we could be. How can an “ideal” be about women if it is defined as how much of a female sexual characterisic does not exist on the woman’s body, and how much of a female life does not show on her face?
Profit It cannot be about women, for the “ideal” is not about women but about money. The current Surgical Age is, like the Victorian medical system, impelled by easy profits. The cosmetic surgery industry in the United States grosses $300 million every year, and is growing annually by 10 percent. But as women get used to comfort and freedom, it cannot continue to count on profit from women’s willingness to suffer for their sex. A mechanism of intimidation must be set in place to maintain that rate of growth, higher than that of any other “medical specialty.” Women’s pain threshold has to be raised, and a new sense of vulnerability imbedded in us, if the industry is to reap the full profit of their new technology acting on old guilt. The surgeons’ market is imaginary, since there is nothing wrong with women’s faces or bodies that social change won’t cure; so the surgeons depend for their income on warping female self-perception and multiplying female self-hatred.
“The myth of female frailty, and the very real cult of female hypochondria that seemed to support the myth, played directly into the financial interests of the medical profession,” according to Ehrenreich and English. In the nineteenth century, competition in the medical profession rose. Doctors were frantic to ensure a reliable patient pool of wealthy women, a “client caste,” who could be convinced of the need for regular house calls and lengthy convalescences. Suffragists saw through to the real impetus behind women’s invalidism—the doctor’s interests and the unnatural conditions that confined women’s lives.
Mary Livermore, a suffragist, protested “the monstrous assumption that woman is a natural invalid,” and denounced “the unclean army of ‘gynecologists’” who “seem desirous to convince women that they possess but one set of organs—and that these are always diseased.” Dr.
Mary Putnam Jacobi traced women’s ill health directly to “their new function as lucrative patients.” As Ehrenreich and English put it: “As a businessman, the doctor had a direct interest in a social role for women that required them to be sick.” Modern cosmetic surgeons have a direct financial interest in a social role for women that requires them to feel ugly. They do not simply advertise for a share of a market that already exists: Their advertisements create new markets. It is a boom industry because it is influentially placed to create its own demand through the pairing of text with ads in women’s magazines.
The industry takes out ads and gets coverage; women get cut open.
They pay their money and they take their chances. As surgeons grow richer, they are able to command larger and brighter ad space: The October 1988 issue of Harper’s and Queen is typical, in pairing a positive article on surgery with the same amount of space, on the same pages, of surgical advertising. In The New York Times health supplement of July 1989, advertising for regulated fasts, fat farms, weight-loss camps, surgeons, and eating disorder specialists fills over half the commercial space. By September 1990, the quid pro quo was solid: Cosmopolitan provided a slavishly uncritical puff piece in an issue supported by fullpage, full-color surgical advertising. The time has arrived when the relationship among cosmetic surgery, ad revenue, risks, and warnings is re-creating cigarette advertising’s inhibitions on antismoking journalism before the Surgeon General took his stand. With journalists given little incentive to expose or pursue them (indeed, they are given incentive not to: The premier cosmetic surgeons’ organization offers a $500 journalism prize, 2 free plane tickets included), the surgeons’ status and influence will continue to rise. Tending cultural, not biological, needs, they may well continue to accumulate power over women’s social and economic life or death; if so, soon they should be what many seem to want to be: little gods, whom no one will wish to cross.
If women suddenly stopped feeling ugly, the fastest-growing medical specialty would be the fastest dying. In many states of the United States, where cosmetic surgeons (as opposed to plastic surgeons, who specialize in burns, trauma, and birth defects) can be any nonspecialist M.D., it would be back to mumps and hemorrhoids for the doctors, conditions that advertising cannot exacerbate. They depend for their considerable livelihood on selling women a feeling of terminal ugliness. If you tell someone she has cancer, you cannot create in her the disease and its agony. But tell a woman persuasively enough that she is ugly, you do create the “disease,” and its agony is real. If you wrap up your advertisement, alongside an article promoting surgery, in a context that makes women feel ugly, and leads us to believe that other women are competing in this way, then you have paid for promoting a disease that you alone can cure.
This market creation seems not to be subject to the ethics of the genuine medical profession. Healing doctors would be discredited if they promoted behavior that destroyed health in order to profit from the damage: Hospitals are withdrawing investment from tobacco and alcohol companies. The term for this practice, ethical investing, recognizes that some medical profit relationships are unethical. Hospitals can afford such virtue, since their patient pool of the sick and dying is always naturally replenished. But cosmetic surgeons must create a patient pool where none biologically exists. So they take out full-page ads in The New York Times—showing a full-length image of a famous model in a swimsuit, accompanied by an offer of easy credit and low monthly terms, as if a woman’s breasts were a set of consumer durables—and make their dream of mass disease come true.
Ethics Though the Surgical Age has begun, it remains socially, ethically, and politically unexamined. While the last thing women need is anyone telling us what we can or cannot do to our bodies, and while the last thing we need is to be blamed for our choices, the fact that no ethical debate has centered on the supply side of the Surgical Age is telling.
This laissez-faire attitude is inconsistent for many reasons. Much debate and legislation constrains the purchase of body parts and protects the body from risks posed to it by the free market. Law recognizes that the human body is fundamentally different from an inanimate object when it comes to buying and selling. United States law forbids the commercial barter of the vagina, mouth, or anus in most states. It criminalizes selfmaiming and suicide, and rejects contracts based on people assuming personal risks that are unreasonable (in this case, risk of death). Philosopher Immanuel Kant wrote that selling body parts violates the ethical limitations on what may be sold in the marketplace. The World Health Organization condemns the sale of human organs for transplant; British and American law banned it, as did at least twenty other countries.
Fetal experimentation is banned in the United States, and in Great Britain Parliament debated the issue bitterly. In the Baby M. case in the United States the court ruled that it is illegal to buy or rent a womb. It is illegal in the United States and Britain to buy a baby. Ethical discussion is raised by the financial pressure on a woman to sell her uterus, or on a man to sell a kidney. Agonizing national debate centers on the life and death of the fetus. Our willingness to wrestle with such issues is taken as a sign of society’s moral health.
What the surgeons traffic in is body parts, and the method of the sale is invasive. Experimental fetal tissue is dead; it still raises complex questions. The women subjected to surgical experiments are still alive.
Surgeons call tissues on a woman’s body dead so that they can profitably kill them. Is a woman entirely alive, or only the parts of her that are young and “beautiful”? Social pressure to let old people die raises questions about eugenics. What about social pressure on a woman to destroy the “deformity” on her healthy body, or to kill off the age in herself? Does that say nothing about society’s moral health? How can what is wrong in the body politic be not only right but necessary on the female body? Is nothing political going on here?
When it comes to women and the ethical void opened by the Surgical Age, no guidelines apply and no debate follows. The most violent people set limits for themselves to mark that they have not lost their humanity.
A soldier balks at killing a baby, the Department of Defense draws the line at poison gas, the Geneva Convention asserts that even in war there remains such a thing as going too far: We agree that civilized people can recognize torture and condemn it. But in this, the beauty myth seems to exist outside civilization: There is as yet no such thing as a limit.
The myth rests on the fallacy that beauty is a form of Darwinism, a natural struggle for scarce resources, and that nature is red in tooth and claw. Even if one is able to accept the fallacy that women’s pain for beauty can be justified—as generals justify war—as part of an inevitable evolutionary conflict, one must still recognize that at no point have civilized people said about it, as they do about military excesses, that’s enough, we are not animals.
The Hippocratic Oath begins, “First, do no harm.” A victim of medical experimentation quoted in Robert Jay Lifton’s The Nazi Doctors asked the doctors, “Why do you want to operate on me? I am…not sick.” The actions of cosmetic surgeons directly contradict the medical ethics of healing doctors. Healing doctors follow a strict code, established after the Nuremberg trials, to protect patients from irresponsible experimentation: The code condemns excessive risk in medical experimentation; it absolutely forbids experimentation without a therapeutic purpose; it insists on the patients’ free and uncoerced choice to participate; and it compels full disclosure of risks in obtaining patients’ “informed consent.” Looking at their actions strictly literally, not rhetorically, it’s clear that modern cosmetic surgeons are daily violating the medical code of Nuremberg.
Cosmetic surgical techniques appear to be developed in irresponsible medical experiments, using desperate women as laboratory animals: In the first stabs at liposuction in France, powerful hoses tore out of women, along with massive globules of living tissue, entire nerve networks, dendrites and ganglia. Undaunted, the experimenters kept at it. Nine French women died of the “improved” technique, which was called a success and brought to the United States.
Liposuctionists begin their practice in the absence of any hands-on experience during training. “My surgeon has never done that procedure before…so he will use me to ‘experiment,’” reports a surgery addict.
With stomach stapling, “surgeons are continuing to experiment in order to come up with better techniques.” To protect patients from medical experimentation, the Nuremberg Code emphasizes that in order genuinely to consent, patients must know all the risks. Though patients are asked to sign consent forms, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to get accurate or objective information about cosmetic surgery. Most coverage stresses women’s responsibility to research the practitioners and procedures. But reading only women’s magazines, a woman might learn the complications—but not their probability; devoting full-time research to it, she still won’t find out the mortality rate. Either no one knows it who should, or no one’s telling. A spokeswoman for the American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons says, “No one’s keeping the figures for a mortality rate. There are no records for an overall death rate.” The same is true in Canada. The British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons also states that statistics are not available. One cosmetic surgery informational source admits to 1 death in 30,000, which must mean that at least 67 American women are dead so far—though these odds are never mentioned in articles in the popular press. Most available sources omit levels of risk and all omit descriptions of levels of pain, as a random survey of popular books on the subject shows: In About Face, the authors cover five procedures including liposuction, chemical peel, and chemodermabrasion, but mention neither risks nor pain. The Beautiful Body Book covers procedures including breast surgery, dermabrasion, and liposuction without mentioning risks, pain, breast hardening, reoperation rates, or cancer detection difficulties. The author describes breast reduction surgery and “repositioning” surgery (for when, in her words, “the nipple is misplaced”). These procedures permanently kill the erotic response of the nipple. She does mention this side effect only to dismiss it with the astonishing opinion of a “Dr. Brink” who “told me that it is not unusual for many women with oversized breasts to have little or no feeling in the nipple area anyway.” She goes on to give “facts” that, typically for such books, are simply wrong: Liposuction, she misstates, has resulted in “only four deaths” (The New York Times counted eleven in 1987) and that “to date, no long-term negative effects have been observed.” The Poutney Clinic brochure does not mention in their list of “risks” pain, loss of nipple sensation in any of the five breast surgeries they offer, or the risk of death. The Surgery Advisory Service brochure gives out a flat untruth: Scar tissue development after breast surgery, it claims, “is rare,” happening only “very occasionally,” though estimates for scarring actually range from 10 percent of all cases to as many as 70 percent.
Cosmetic surgeon Dr. Thomas D. Rees’s approach to informed consent is characteristic: to “give [his] patients a paper designed to provide them with as much practical information as possible without scaring them half to death about the multitude of complications” that, despite what he calls their rarity, “could befall them.” It is also very difficult to tell which sources are partial: The Independent (London), a respected newspaper, ran a positive article on surgery, ending in an advertisement for their Independent Guide to Cosmetic Surgery (two pounds), which plays down risk and advertises all the qualified surgeons in Great Britain. A woman cannot know what the chances are that a horror story will happen to her, until it does; her ignorance alone puts the cosmetic surgeons in violation of both the letter and spirit of Nuremberg.
Healing doctors respect the healthy body and invade the diseased only as a last resort; cosmetic surgeons call healthy bodies sick in order to invade them. The former avoid operating on family members; the latter are the first men to whom technology grants the ancient male fantasy of mythical Pygmalion, the sculptor who fell in love with his own creation: At least one surgeon has totally reconstructed his wife.
Healing doctors resist being manipulated by addicts; there is already a class of women who are addicted to surgery, reports Newsweek, “scalpel slaves” who “indulge…in plastic surgery the way some of us eat chocolate—compulsively. Neither cost, pain nor spectacular bruising lessen [the] desire for a little more whittling.” One surgeon gives an addict a discount for repeat operations. Addicts “go from doctor to doctor, seeking multiple operations…. Their self-scrutiny becomes microscopic. They start complaining about bumps the average person doesn’t see.” And the surgeons operate: Dr. Frank Dunton has cut up one woman at least half a dozen times, “and expects to keep up the remodelling work. ‘I guess it’s all right,’ he says, ‘as long as her husband doesn’t complain.’” Safeguards Medical coercion in service of a vital lie is less regulated than legitimate medicine. In the nineteenth century, sexual surgery was risky and unscientific, with few legal checks. Patients were more likely, until around 1912, to be harmed by medical intervention than helped. Little, according to today’s standards, was known about how the body worked, and strange experiments on women’s reproductive organs were common.
The American Medical Association had no legal control over who could call himself a doctor. Doctors had virtually free rein to peddle opiatebased, addictive snake oils, and miracle cures for vague female maladies.
The new atrocities are flourishing without intervention from the institutions that promise to safeguard the welfare of citizens. In a sexual double standard as to who receives consumer protection, it seems that if what you do is done to women in the name of beauty, you may do what you like. It is illegal to claim that something grows hair, or makes you taller, or restores virility, if it does not. It is difficult to imagine that the baldness remedy Minoxidil would be on the market if it had killed nine French and at least eleven American men. In contrast, the longterm effects of Retin-A are still unknown—Dr. Stuart Yuspa of the National Cancer Institute refers to its prescription as “a human experiment”—and the Food and Drug Administration has not approved it; yet dermatologists are prescribing it to women at a revenue of over $150 million a year.
The silicone injections of the 1970s, never approved by the FDA, have hardened “like a sack of rocks,” as Dr. Thomas Rees puts it, in women’s breasts. The long-term carcinogenic effect of silicone is unknown, but surgeons are still injecting it into women’s faces. “Peeling parlors” have appeared where operators with no medical training at all use acid to cause second-degree burns on women’s faces. It wasn’t until 1988 that the FDA cracked down on quack cures for weight loss aimed at women, a $25-billion-a-year business.
For the forty years before the crackdown, disreputable physicians prescribed, for “medically approved” weight-loss treatment: amphetamines and related addictive drugs, high doses of digitalis, a highly toxic heart drug, injections from pregnant women’s urine, extended fasting, brain surgery, jaw wiring, and intestinal bypass. Though all were promoted by doctors, none was backed by long-term animal studies or clinical trials for safety or effectiveness. Mass-market diet formulas still place dangerous stresses on the body when normal eating is resumed; PPA (phenylpropanolamine), present in diet pills and herbal weight-loss remedies, causes danger to the heart, but need not be labeled on the product. Women are still prescribed addictive cocaine- and amphetamine-derived drugs for weight loss, but this does not merit the attention of the President’s task force on drugs. This lack of regulation is itself a message to women, a message that we understand.
In Great Britain, doctors who are not registered by the National Health Service to perform cosmetic surgery invent objective-sounding organization names—such as the Cosmetic Surgery Helpline, the Medical Advisory Group, the Surgery Advisory Service—and make use on their literature of the winged staff and serpents of Asclepius, god of healing and of the medical profession. They mislead women into thinking they are getting impartial information, when what they do is lobby over the phone, through medically untrained “counselors,” for new patients. In the United States, it was not until 1989, ten years into the Surgical Age, that a congressional hearing was convened by Congressman Ron Wyden (Democrat, Oregon), to investigate what one witness called “the last refuge of freebooters charging what the market will bear” and their advertising, which is “often misleading and false…preying on the insecurities of American women.” Testimony accused the Federal Trade Commission of a failure to regulate the “profession,” and blamed it for permitting advertising in the 1970s and then abandoning responsibility for what the ads had wrought. An M.D/D.P.S. is “board-certified” by the American Board of Plastic Surgery, and therefore trained; but an American woman who is told that it is her burden to ensure that the surgeon is “board-certified” is unlikely to know that there are over one hundred different “boards” with official-sounding names that go unregulated. Fully 90 percent of cosmetic surgery in the United States is performed in unregulated doctors’ offices. Finally, asserted the congressional testimony, “there is no standard method for preoperative screening,” so any woman is operable. What did Congress do about the situation once it was staring them in the face? Nothing: The legislation proposed after Congress saw 1,790 pages of shocking testimony is, says Dr. Steve Scott, spokesman for Congressman Wyden’s office, more than a year afterward, “on hold.” Why? Because it happens to women for beauty, so it is not serious.
ual Surgery It is particularly not serious if it is sexual. The industry expanded in the 1980s in response to beauty pornography. When AIDS curbed heterosexual promiscuity, men and women had fewer real-life sexual experiences to make them secure in the knowledge that good sex looked all sorts of ways. When there were fewer authentic images of sexuality in people’s heads with which they could counteract the influence of commercial images of sexuality, “body sculpting” took on a life of its own, driving the sexes apart into a complementary narcissism no longer even aimed at seduction. Women lifted weights and “got hard”; but it is men who “get hard,” and “beauty” is necessary in women to apologize for masculine power: When they were hard all over, they had incisions opened under the folds of their breasts and clear sacs of gel inserted. The muscles were the hypermasculine iron fist; the artificial breasts, the hyperfeminine velvet glove. This ideal was no longer a “naked woman,” that vulnerable being. Its breasts made of clear chemicals, it had got rid of as much of the “naked” and the “woman” that could go.
Anywhere from 200,000 to 1 million American women have had their breasts cut open and sacs of chemical gel implanted.
Journalist Jeremy Weir Alderson in Self magazine puts the number at over a million, and the profits at between $168 million and $374 million.
(The operation costs from $1,800 to $4,000.) The breast, he writes, is the part surgeons are cutting into most: 159,300 breast operations in a year, compared with 67,000 face-lifts. The surgery leads to a hardening of scar tissue around the implants in up to seven cases in ten, when the breasts become rock-hard and must be reopened and the implants removed, or the lumps torn apart by the full weight of the surgeon using his bare hands. Saltwater implants deflate and must be extracted; implant manufacturers provide surgeons with routine insurance to cover replacements (surgeons buy the sacs in packs of three pairs of different sizes). Silicone implants leak the substance into the body to unknown effect, medical journals predicting immune-system problems and toxic shock syndrome. Implants make it harder to detect cancer. In a study at the Breast Center in Van Nuys, California, of twenty cancer patients with implants, none of the breast tumors had been detected early, and by the time the disease could be discovered, the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes of thirteen of the women. Dr. Susan Chobanian, a Beverly Hills cosmetic surgeon, says that “very few women withdraw after hearing the risks.” A risk never mentioned in sources available to most women is the death of the nipple: According to Penny Chorlton, “Any surgery on the breast can and probably will adversely affect any erotic stimulation a woman has hitherto enjoyed, and this should be pointed out by the surgeon in case it is important to the patient” (italics added). Breast surgery, therefore, in its mangling of erotic feeling, is a form of sexual mutilation.
Imagine this: penis implants, penis augmentation, foreskin enhancement, testicular silicone injections to correct asymmetry, saline injections with a choice of three sizes, surgery to correct the angle of erection, to lift the scrotum and make it pert. Before and after shots of the augmented penis in Esquire. Risks: Total numbing of the glans. Diminution of sexual feeling. Permanent obliteration of sexual feeling. Glans rigidity, to the consistency of hard plastic. Testicular swelling and hardening, with probable repeat operations, including scar tissue formation that the surgeon must break apart with manual pressure. Implant collapse.
Leakage. Unknown long-term consequences. Weeks of recovery necessary during which the penis must not be touched. The above procedures are undergone because they make men sexy to women, or so men are told.
Civilized people will agree that these are mutilations so horrible that a woman should not even be able to think them. I recoiled when I wrote them. You, if a woman, probably flinched when you read them; if you were a man, your revulsion was no doubt almost physical.
But since women are taught to identify more compassionately with the body of a man or a child—or a fetus or a primate or a baby seal—than with our own, we read of similar attacks on our own sexual organs with numbness. Just as women’s sexuality is turned inside out so that we identify more with male pleasure than female, the same goes for our identification with pain. One could protest that breast and penis are not parallel terms, and that is valid: Breast surgery is not exactly a clitoridectomy. It is only half a clitoridectomy.
But it is not like real genital mutilation, one could argue, because women choose it. In West Africa, Muslim girls with uncircumcised clitorises can’t marry. The tribe’s women excise the clitoris with unsterilized broken bottles or rusty knives, leading often to hemorrhrage and infection, sometimes to death. Women are the agents there. One could say with as much insight that those women “do it to themselves.” An estimated twenty-five million women in Africa are sexually mutilated. The common explanation is that it makes women more fertile, when the opposite is true. Foot-binding in China also had a sexual rationale, as Andrea Dworkin has noted: Chinese foot-binding was believed to alter the vagina, causing “a supernatural exaltation” during sex, so, as a Chinese diplomat explained, the system “was not really oppressive,” though, Dworkin writes, “the flesh often became putrescent during the binding and portions sloughed off from the sole” and “sometimes one or more toes dropped off.” It was the essence of desirability: No Chinese girl “could bear the ridicule involved in being called a ‘large-footed demon’ and the shame of being unable to marry.” The rationale for breast surgery is also sexual desire and desirability.
Like breast surgery, genital mutilation was trivialized: Atrocities that happen to women are “sexual” and not “political,” so the U.S. State Department, the World Health Organization, and UNICEF called them “social and cultural attitudes” and did nothing. At last, though, WHO monitored the practice. Daniel Arap Moi, president of Kenya, banned it in 1982, after he learned that fourteen girls had died.
Western sexual surgery is not new. Normal female sexuality was a disease in the nineteenth century, just as normal breasts are operable today. The role of the nineteenth-century gynecologist was the “detection, judgment and punishment” of sexual disease and “social crime.” Pelvic surgery became widespread as a “social reflex,” since “orgasm was disease and cure was its destruction.” Victorian clitoridectomy made women behave. “Patients are cured…the moral sense of the patient is elevated…she becomes tractable, orderly, industrious and cleanly.” Modern surgeons claim they make women feel better, and that, no doubt, is true; Victorian middle-class women had so internalized the idea of their sexuality as diseased that the gynecologists were “answering their prayers.” Says a face-lift patient of Dr. Thomas Rees’s, “The relief was enormous.” One of Victorian Dr.
Cushing’s patients, relieved by the scalpel of the “temptation” to masturbate, wrote, “A window has been opened in heaven [for me].” “It’s changed my life,” says a rhinoplasty patient of Dr. Thomas Rees’s: “As simple as that.” Victorian medical opinion varied on whether female castration worked in returning women to their “normal” role. A Dr. Warner conceded, as do modern surgeons, that the results were probably psychological, not physical. A Dr. Symington-Brown conceded that, but insisted that the operation was still valid because it worked by “shock effect.” The Surgical Age likewise reinforces women’s submissiveness to the beauty myth with the unspoken background fear: If she is not careful, she will need an operation.
Like the criteria for modern surgery, in which face-lift patients in their twenties are subject to a “preventive” operation that is, in the words of one doctor, “pure marketing hype,” the criteria for clitoridectomy were at first narrowly defined but soon became all-encompassing.
Dr. Symington-Brown began clitoridectomies in 1859. By the 1860s he was removing labia as well. He became more confident, operating on girls as young as ten, on idiots, epileptics, paralytics, and women with eye problems. As a surgery addict says in She magazine, “Once you start, it has a knock-on effect.” He operated five times on women who wanted divorces—each time returning wife to husband. “The surgery…was a ceremony of stigmatization that frightened most of them into submission…. The mutilation, sedation and psychological intimidation…seems to have been an efficient, if brutal, form of reprogramming.” “Clitoridectomy,” writes Showalter, “is the surgical enforcement of an ideology that restricts female sexuality to reproduction,” just as breast surgery is of an ideology that restricts female sexuality to “beauty.” Victorian women complained of being “tricked and coerced” into treatment, as did the American women who in 1989 described to talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey the genital mutilations inflicted on them without their consent by a surgeon convinced he could improve their orgasms by surgical reconstruction.
It is not coincidental that breast surgery is expanding at a time when female sexuality is such a threat. That was true in Victorian times as well, when doctors treated amenorrhea by placing leeches directly on the vagina or cervix, and cauterized the uterus for discharge with chromic acid. “The operation…is not what’s important,” says a rhinoplasty patient, as Victorian women’s “mental agony and physical torture was accounted nothing.” Surgeons are becoming media stars. “Glamour and prestige” came to surround the gynecological surgeon, and doctors often advised surgery where less dramatic measures were enough.
Ovariotomy “became a fashionable operation in spite of a mortality rate sometimes as high as 40%. Not only the diseased ovary but the healthy, normal ovary fell prey to the sexual surgeons” (italics added). One has only to open a cosmetic surgery brochure to see how very normal and healthy are the breasts now “prey to the sexual surgeons.” The modern sexual surgeons display their work with pride; Fay Weldon’s The Life and Loves of a She-Devil reproduces a current fantasy of the completely reconstructed woman shown off to fellow surgeons at a cocktail party. Victorian doctors boasted of the numbers of ovariotomies they had performed and displayed ovaries arranged on silver platters to admiring audiences at meetings of the American Gynecological Society.
The removal of the ovaries was developed in 1872. The next year, it was recommended for “non-ovarian conditions,” especially masturbation, so that by 1906 about 150,000 American women were without ovaries. “Non-ovarian conditions” was a social judgment aimed to prevent the “unfit” from breeding and polluting the body politic. “The ‘unfit’ included…any women who had been corrupted by masturbation, contraception and abortion…from the 1890s until the Second World War, mentally ill women were ‘castrated.’” The “Orificial Surgery Society” in 1925 offered surgical training in clitoridectomy and infibulation “because of the vast amount of sickness and suffering which could be saved the gentler sex.” Ten years ago, an Ohio gynecologist offered a $1,500 “Mark Z” operation to reconstruct the vagina “to make the clitoris more accessible to direct penile stimulation.” A common boast of modern cosmetic surgeons is that their work saves women from lives of suffering and misery.
There is a genre of pornography that centers on hurting and cutting women’s breasts. It is frightening that what seems to be considered erotic about breast surgery is not that it makes women appear to have bigger or better natural breasts—no one seems interested in pretending that they look natural; nor that it makes women more “womanly”; not even that it makes the breasts more “perfect.” What frightens is that the surgery itself is being eroticized. A Hungarian magazine features local beauties’ breasts alongside the surgeons who constructed them; Playboy has featured the surgery of Mariel Hemingway and Jessica Hahn—not so much the breasts; the surgery. It is frightening to see that now, in a woman-fearing era, the thought of scientists cutting open, invading, and artificially reconstructing the breasts of women appears to be emerging as the ultimate erotic triumph.
The artificial reconstruction of the breast may now have become eroticized for women too. It is only after two decades of beauty pornography curtailing female sexuality that a sexually dead breast can be seen and felt to be “better” than one that is sexually alive. The same tacit censorship that edits images of women’s faces and body shapes also edits images of the female breast, keeping women ignorant about what breasts are actually like. screens breasts with impeccable thoroughness, almost never representing those that are soft, or asymmetrical, or mature, or that have gone through the changes of pregnancy.
Looking at breasts in culture, one would have little idea that real breasts come in as many shapes and variations as there are women. Since most women rarely if ever see or touch other women’s breasts, they have no idea what they feel like, or of the way they move and shift with the body, or of how they really look during lovemaking. Women of all ages have a fixation—sad in the light of how varied women’s breasts really are in texture—on “pertness” and “firmness.” Many young women suffer agonies of shame from their conviction that they alone have stretch marks. Since beauty censorship keeps women in profound darkness about other women’s real bodies, it is able to make virtually any woman feel that her breasts alone are too soft or low or sagging or small or big or weird or wrong, and to steal from her the full and exquisite eroticism of the nipple.
The trend toward breast surgery is created by a culture that blocks out all breasts that are not the Official Breast, calls the imagery left over from this editing “sex,” keeps women ignorant of their own and other women’s bodies, and provides a little-monitored service that distributes for several thousand dollars (“Each?” “No, both”) the permissible replacement to frantic women.
In a television ad for an American cosmetic surgeon, the actress on screen purrs with the smile of the well-satisfied woman. Nothing on her face looks unusual. It is understood that she is not talking about her face. Women are not cutting their breasts open for individual men, by and large, but so that they can experience their own sexuality. In a diseased environment, they are doing this “for themselves.” Most are married or in stable relationships. Fully a third are mothers whose breasts have, in the surgeon’s words, “atrophied” after pregnancy. Their partners “categorically deny” they encouraged the operations, and protest that they never criticized their lovers’ breasts.
This sexual mutilation is not about relations between real men and women. It is about women’s sexuality trapped in the beauty backlash, in spite of men who may love them. Soon, not even a loving partner will be able to save many women’s sexuality from the knife. Today a woman must ignore her reflection in the eyes of her lover, since he might admire her, and seek it in the gaze of the God of Beauty, in whose perception she is never complete.
What is it about the Official Breast that makes it cancel out all other breasts? Of all shapes and sizes, it best guarantees adolescence. Very young girls, of course, have small breasts, but so do many mature women. Many mature women have large breasts that are not “firm” and “pert.” The breast that is high but also large and firm is most likely to belong to a teenager. In a culture which fears the price of women’s sexual self-confidence, that breast is the reassuring guarantee of extreme youth—sexual ignorance and infertility.
Freud believed that repression of the libido made civilization; civilization depends at the moment on the repression of female libido: In 1973, Psychology Today reports, one fourth of American women surveyed were unhappy with the size or shape of their breasts. By 1986, the number had risen to a third; it was not women’s breasts that had changed in the meantime.
This is why many women increasingly can’t care that surgery does things to their breasts that might repel a sexual interest that is merely human—rigidification that turns them to the consistency of hard plastic.
Women report (at least, articles on surgery report that women report) new sexual fulfillment after the operation, even if their breasts are nervedead and rock-hard. How can that be? Many women’s sexuality is becoming so externalized by beauty pornography that they may truly be more excited by sexual organs that, though dead or immobile, visually fit into it.
So breast implants, even if they feel bizarre to her lover and cut off sensation in herself, may in fact “free” a woman sexually. They look official. They photograph well. They have become artifact—not-woman—and will never change, the beauty myth’s ultimate goal. Plastic body parts won’t stop here.
Surgeons are not expected to elicit what will make the woman beautiful in her own eyes, but to guarantee her that they will impose on her body the culture’s official fantasy. They seem to have no illusions about their role. An ad in a surgical journal shows a hairy male hand squeezing a glutinous implant. Gel (made, incidentally, by the manufacturers of napalm) bulges out between its fingers. The text asserts that the product “feels natural”—to the squeezing hand.
Medical ethics treats interference in male sexuality as an atrocity.
Depo-Provera, a drug that lowers the libido of male criminals, is controversial because it is barbaric to intervene in male sexuality. But female sexuality is still treated by institutions as if it were hypothetical.
Not only do factory-produced breasts endanger women’s sensual response; many other procedures harm it too. (The Pill, for example, which was supposed to make women “sexier,” actually lowers their libido, a side effect of which they are rarely informed.) A risk of eyelid surgery is blindness; a nose job risks damage to the sense of smell; numbness accompanies face-lifts. If the surgical ideal is sensual, there must be other senses than the usual five.
Numbness Enough pain makes people numb. Look at a “done-up” woman walking down a wintry street, branches rattling above her. She is wearing a costume, part flamenco dancer, part Carmen, a self-creation that is fragile and arresting. She painted her face for an hour, blending and shading, and now she holds her head as if it were a work of art. Her legs in black silk are numb from the windchill. The deep parting of her dress is open to a blast of wind, which raises tiny hairs on her skin. Her Achilles tendons are ground by the upward pressure of her black-red spike heels, and are relentlessly throbbing. But heads turn, and keep turning: Who’s that? Each glance is like a shot from a hypodermic. As long as the heads keep turning, she truly is not cold.
A healthy body’s reflexes lead it to avoid pain. But beauty thinking is an anesthetic, with the ability to make women more like objects by cauterizing sensation. The beauty index is raising our pain threshold to support surgical technologies. To survive the Surgical Age, we do have to keep ourselves from knowing what we feel. The more we suffer, the more psychological resistance there will be to reopening the mental channels we had to block. In the Milgram Experiments of the 1950s, researchers placed subjects’ hands on a lever that they were told would administer electric shocks to people whom they could not see. Then, scientists told them to keep administering increasing levels of shock.
The subjects, unwilling to disobey scientific authorities telling them it was right, and cut off from seeing the “victims,” raised the electric currents to fatal levels. A woman learns, in the dawn of the Surgical Age, to relate to her body as the experimental subjects related to the shock victims. Separated from it, asked not to see it or feel for it as human, she is being taught by scientific authorities to do her worst.
Electric shock is not just a metaphor. It has been part of the control of women since electricity was in use. Victorian invalids were subjected to galvanic shocks. Electroshock therapy is used typically on women asylum patients, and bears a strong resemblance to the death-and-rebirth ceremonial of cosmetic surgery. Like surgery, it has, claims Elaine Showalter in The Female Malady, “the trappings of a powerful religious ritual, conducted by a priestly masculine figure…[its magic] comes from its imitation of the death and rebirth ceremony. For the patient it represents a rite of passage in which the doctor kills off the ‘bad’ crazy self, and resurrects the ‘good’ self”—in poet Sylvia Plath’s vision of electroshock, a good self born again “not of woman.” “For this reason, suicidal patients are often comforted by ECT; upon awakening, they feel that in a sense they have died and been born again, with the hated parts of themselves annihilated—literally, electrocuted.” Gerald McKnight describes an antiaging “therapy” in which electric shocks are applied to the face. Lancôme makes a “contouring product of extreme precision” that promises to “attack unwanted bulges”: It is “the first thermic body contouring shock treatment.” Electric shock has encouraged passivity in political dissidents from the Soviet Union to Chile.
Now that women are invited to act as their own electroshock operators, there is no point in detailing case after case that has gone disgustingly wrong, or to say again that the surgery is expensive and very very painful, and that the chances are you will turn your body over to someone who is unregulated, unqualified, and not on your side. Neither is there much point anymore in talking about fatalities.
That apathy is the real issue: The global numbing effect is under way.
With every article on surgery that details the horrors of it, as many do, women, ironically, lose a bit more of our ability to feel for our own bodies and identify with our own pain—a survival skill, since with each article, social pressure to undergo those very horrors will have mounted. Women know about the atrocities; but we cannot feel them anymore.
As the index rises and surgical technologies become more sophisticated, this numbing process will accelerate. Procedures that still sound barbaric to our ears will soon be absorbed into the encroaching numbness. The myth spreads eastward: Procedures that we have come to tolerate in America still sound nauseating in Great Britain and revolting in the Netherlands, but next year British women will be able to keep their gorge from rising and Dutch women will feel merely queasy. Parts of ourselves that we now admire with pleasure will next year be reclassified as fresh deformities. The pain threshold asked of us will rise and rise. This projection is just arithmetic: Cosmetic surgery doubled its rate every five years in the United States, until it tripled in two; it doubles every decade in Britain. A city of women the size of San Francisco gets cut open each year in the United States; in Britain, a village the size of Bath.
The point is that our numbness is catching up to what the beauty index is asking of us. The reader finishes the article and looks at the pictures: The woman’s face looks as if she has been beaten across the zygomatic ridge with an iron pipe. Her eyes are blackened. The skin of the woman’s hips is a blanket of bruises. The woman’s breasts are swollen out and yellow like hyperthyroid jaundiced eyes. The woman’s breasts don’t move. The blood crusts under the sutures. The reader, two or three years ago, thought these images were alarmist. It dawns on her now, they’re promotional. She is no longer expected to react with the revulsion that she felt at first. Women’s magazines set the beauty index.
They’ve given enormous coverage to surgery, partly because very little happens in the world of “beauty” that is at all new. These features have readers believe that we should balk now at nothing, since it seems that other readers, the competition, are braving it. The typical article, which details weeks of grisly pain but ends in happy beauty, provokes in women something like panic buying.
A woman in a shelter for battered women once described her legs to me as “all one bruise, like they were covered with purplish tights.” In an interview for a book promoting cosmetic surgery, overheard in a Manhattan coffee shop, a woman who had had liposuction used a similar image. What needs to be explored are not the mutilations, but the atmosphere we now inhabit that makes them make no difference.
We have entered a terrifying new age with cosmetic surgery. All limits have broken down. No amount of suffering or threat of disfigurement can serve as a deterrent. What is happening to the female body in relation to cosmetic surgery is like what is happening to the balance of life on the planet. We are at a historic turning point.
The dawn of the Surgical Age in the 1980s did result from some technological advances in the profession. It drew far more energy, though, from the beauty backlash against feminism. The two developments—the means and, more important, the will completely to alter women—has brought us to an extraordinary mental upheaval surrounding life in the female form. With the shift in rhetoric that recast pain and mutilation into diminished language, female consciousness has had to reckon with the sort of destruction of the rules that faced human thinking when the atom was split. With the huge expansion of possibility came a huge expansion of danger.
If anything on a woman’s body can be changed, something revolutionary—or demonic—has come about in the alternate world of the beauty myth. Does it mean the cruel old economy is blasted apart? That science has indeed opened up a horizon of beauty for all women who can afford it? Does it mean the bitterly rankling caste system, in which some are born “better” than others, is dead, and women are free?
That has been the popular interpretation: The Surgical Age is an unqualified good. It is the American dream come true: One can re-create oneself “better” in a brave new world. It has even, understandably, been interpreted as a feminist liberation: Ms. magazine hailed it as “selftransformation”; in Lear’s, a woman surgeon urges, “Voilà! You are led to freedom.” This hopeful female yearning for a magic technology that destroys the beauty myth and its injustice—with a “beauty” that is almost fair because you can earn it with pain and buy it with money—is a poignant, but shortsighted, response.
It is with the same kind of hopefulness that the atom bomb was introduced in the 1950s. The Bomb was presented at the end of total war as a magic equalizer of unequal nations; cosmetic surgery is presented as the miraculous peacekeeper in women’s combat under the beauty myth. It took decades for people to recognize the true impact of the nuclear age on human consciousness. Whether or not it would ever be used again, the Bomb changed forever how we thought about the world.
With the Age of Surgery, we are at the very first swell of a wave whose end we cannot see. But the cheerfulness with which we are embracing this technology is as shortsighted as the optimism about the Bomb that flooded the market with Atomic beachwear and cartoon characters. With cosmetic surgery, consciousness inside the female body is undergoing a transformation that may mean we have lost the body’s boundaries, so recently defined and defended—and our presurgical orientation inside it—forever.
We are affected by the Bomb whether or not it is detonated. Whether or not a woman ever undergoes cosmetic surgery, her mind is now being shaped by its existence. The expectation of surgery will continue to rise.
Since the beauty myth works in a mappable balance system, as soon as enough women are altered and critical mass is reached so that too many women look like the “ideal,” the “ideal” will always shift. Ever-different cutting and stitching will be required of women if we are to keep our sexuality and our livelihood.
In 1945, we lost the luxury of taking for granted that the world would outlive the individual. Technology made its destruction imaginable.
Around 1990, technology introduced the end of the woman-made female body. A woman began to lose the luxury of taking for granted that she had a face and a body that were hers alone in which she could live out her life.
The years between the development of the Bomb and the evolution of Einstein’s “new manner of thinking” about war were the most dangerous. Human beings had the means to destroy the world through using new technology in conventional warfare, but had not yet evolved beyond imagining the inevitability of conventional warfare. Today, women have access to the technological capacity to do anything to our bodies in the struggle for “beauty,” but we have yet to evolve a mentality beyond the old rules, to let them imagine that this combat among women is not inevitable. Surgeons can now do anything. We have not yet reached the age in which we can defend ourselves with an unwillingness to have “anything” done.
This is a dangerous time.
New possibilities for women quickly become new obligations. It is a short step from “anything can be done for beauty” to “anything must be done.” What must be worked through before we can start thinking our way to safety is the assertion that women freely choose this pain.
We need to ask what “choice” and “pain” mean in relation to women in the Surgical Age.
Pain What makes pain exist? Law theorist Suzanne Levitt points out that in the courtroom, in order to prove harm has been done, you have to prove you are worse off than you were before. But, she says, since there is a “background noise” of harm around them, women aren’t seen to be hurt when they are hurt. The same concept seems to hold true for recognition of the harm done women for beauty’s sake: Since women should be addicted to “beauty,” this life-threatening addiction is not real. Since women should suffer to be beautiful—since our suffering is beautiful—the pain we feel is “discomfort.” Because women’s money is not real money but pin money, and because women are fools for “beauty” and a fool and her money are soon parted, fraudulent practices are not fraud and women’s play money is fair game. Because women are deformed to begin with, we cannot really suffer deformation. Because we are gullible by nature in search of “beauty,” no deception is a scandal.
Pain is real when you can get other people to believe in it. If no one believes it but you, your pain is madness or hysteria or your own unfeminine inadequacy. Women have learned to submit to pain by hearing authority figures—doctors, priests, psychiatrists—tell us that what we feel is not pain.
Women are asked to be stoic in the face of surgical pain as they were asked to be stoic for childbirth. The medieval Church enforced the curse of Eve by refusing to permit any alleviation of the pain of childbirth, according to Andrea Dworkin’s analysis of misogyny, Woman Hating. “The Catholic objection to abortion,” says Dworkin, “centered specifically on the Biblical curse that made childbirth a painful punishment—it did not have to do with the ‘right to life’ of the unborn fetus.” The poet Adrienne Rich reminds women that “patriarchy has told the woman in labor that her suffering was purposive—was the purpose of her existence, that the new life she was bringing forth (especially if male) was of value and that her own value depended on bringing it forth.” The same is true for the “new life” of surgical “beauty.” In maternity wards, asserts the Brighton Women and Science Group in Alice Through the Microscope, the mother-to-be “is usually expected to dissociate herself from her body and its behaviour, to remain in control of herself and behave ‘well.’ The woman who screams in labor, or who cries afterwards, is often made to feel that she ought not, that she has lost control, that her own feelings are not natural, or that she should not give in to them.” Women who have undergone cosmetic surgery report the same experience.
Most women can think of many occasions on which they were told that what was hurting them was not. I remember a gynecologist with thick and senseless hands, who expanded the speculum angrily and shot a meteor of pain to the base of my spine; the fontanelles in my skull seemed to separate and pain poured in like ice. “Stop making faces,” he told me. “This doesn’t hurt.” Or the electrologist a woman told me about who asked, “Have you ever had electrolysis before?” “Yes,” said the woman. “What do you know about it?” “It hurts like hell.” “It does not,” she contradicted. Or the voices one hears over a rape crisis hot line: “They said they didn’t know why I was so upset.
There weren’t any bruises. It wasn’t like he’d hurt me.” Or the career woman who described to me her nose surgery: “It was after a bad love affair that I literally cut off my nose to spite my face. They said if I was a good patient there would be no real pain and only a little blood. I couldn’t bear it. I said it hurt. They said I was overreacting. There was so much blood my sister fainted when she saw me. They said, ‘Now look what you’ve done.’” A “scalpel slave” in She magazine describes a face peel: “Essentially, it is no different from a second-degree burn…. [It] makes you go brown and crispy, then a scab forms and drops off…[it] takes several hours because it is so poisonous and you can’t risk getting it into the bloodstream.” Dr. Thomas Rees minces no words: “Abrasion and peeling traumatizes [sic] the skin…with either procedure, the skin can be removed too deeply and result in an open wound…. deaths [from cardiac arrest] have followed a chemical peel…the skin is frozen [for dermabrasion] until it assumes a boardlike quality that facilitates the abrasion from a rotating wire brush impregnated with diamond particles.” (“Skin planing,” he informs the reader, “originated in World War II, done with sandpaper to remove shrapnel embedded in the skin.” Plastic surgery developed after World War I in reaction to wartime mutilations never witnessed before.) A woman who has witnessed skin planing said to an interviewer, “If we found that they were doing that to people in prison, there would be an international outcry and [the country] would be reported to Amnesty International for torture of the most horrific kind.” Chemical peeling, that “torture of the most horrific kind,” is up, according to Rees, 34 percent.
It is not easy to describe physical pain, and the words we agree on to convey it are rarely adequate. Society has to agree that a certain kind of pain exists in order to ease it. What women experience in the operating theater, under the mask of acid, laid out open to the mouth of the suction machine, passed out cold in wait for the bridge of the nose to be broken, is still private and unsayable.
Their pain is denied through trivialization. “It can be uncomfortable.” “There is some discomfort.” “A little, little bit of bruising and swelling.” One is not yet allowed to compare American and European women’s pain for beauty to real pain, to Amnesty International pain. The comparison will be called overstatement. But the comparison must hold, since women are dying of understatement.
Surgery hurts, it hurts. They hold you underwater just long enough to stop you struggling. You breathe with newly cut gills. They haul you out again, logged and twisted, facedown on a bank with no footprints.
Your spirit held in suspended animation, they drive a tank carefully over your ignorant body.
Waking up hurts, and coming back to life hurts horribly. A hospital, though it is called “luxurious” or “caring,” degrades: Like a prison or a mental institution, wherever the old identity meant trouble, they take away your clothes and give you a numbered bed.
For the time you were under, you lose your life, and you never regain those hours. Visitors come, but you see them through the waters that have closed over your head, another species: the well. Once you have been cut into, no amount of good living can ever erase what you know about how easy, how accommodating death is.
Cosmetic surgery is not “cosmetic,” and human flesh is not “plastic.” Even the names trivialize what it is. It’s not like ironing wrinkles in fabric, or tuning up a car, or altering outmoded clothes, the current metaphors. Trivialization and infantilization pervade the surgeons’ language when they speak to women: “a nip,” a “tummy tuck.” Rees writes, describing a second-degree acid burn over the face: “Remember when you were in school and you skinned your knee and a scab formed?” This baby talk falsifies reality. Surgery changes one forever, the mind as well as the body. If we don’t start to speak of it as serious, the millennium of the man-made woman will be upon us, and we will have had no choice.
Choice “Beauty’s” pain is trivial since it is assumed that women freely choose it. That conviction is what keeps people from seeing that what the Surgical Age is doing to women is human rights abuse. The hunger, the nausea, and surgical invasions of the beauty backlash are political weapons. Through them, a widespread political torture is taking place among us. When a class of people is denied food, or forced to vomit regularly, or repeatedly cut open and stitched together to no medical purpose, we call it torture. Are women less hungry, less bloody, if we act as our own torturers?
Most people will say yes, since women do it to themselves, and it is something that must be done. But it is illogical to conclude that there is a different quality to blood or hunger or second-degree burning because it was “chosen.” Nerve endings cannot tell who has paid for the slicing; a raw dermis is not comforted by the motive behind its burning. People respond illogically when confronted with beauty’s pain since they believe that masochists deserve the pain they get because they enjoy it.
But moreover, women learn what we have to do from our environment. Women are sensitive to the signals that institutions send about what we have to do with our “beauty” to survive, and the institutions are giving us a very clear message that they endorse any level of violence. If struggle for beauty is women’s warfare, the women who draw the line are treated as cowards, as are male pacifists. “Who’s afraid of cosmetic surgery?” taunts a surgeon. Women’s choice in the Age of Surgery is not free, so we have no excuse for refusing to see their pain as real.
Women will have a real choice about cosmetic surgery only when: If we don’t do it, we can keep their livelihood. We saw how surgical alteration has become a requirement for women’s employment and promotion. Surgical brochures emphasize career pressures on women to look “youthful.” That requirement is actually criminal. According to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, “Employers can no longer…purchase the agreement of workers to subject themselves to unsafe or unhealthful working conditions.” Surgery, Retin-A, and chronic caloric deprivation are unhealthful and unsafe, but women faced with the professional beauty qualification lack the choice to resist them and keep their means of support.
If we don’t do it, we can keep our identities. “Choice” means nothing if the choice is to survive or to perish. An animal caught in a trap doesn’t choose to gnaw its leg off. The Iron Maiden is closing now, with her razor outlines. What has outgrown the edge is trapped and must be severed. When women talk about surgery, they speak of “flaws” they “cannot live with,” and they are not being hysterical. Their magazines ask: “Is there life after 40? Is there life after size 16?” and those questions are no joke. Women choose surgery when we are convinced we cannot be who we really are without it. If all women could choose to live with themselves as themselves, most probably would. Women’s fears of loss of identity are legitimate. We “choose” a little death over what is portrayed as an unlivable life; we “choose” to die a bit in order to be born again.
If we don’t do it, we can still keep our places in the community. In traditional cultures such as Greece and Turkey, it is considered obscene for older women to wear the bright colors of youth. There are “modern” communities already—Palm Springs, Beverly Hills, Manhattan’s Upper East Side—that consider it as shocking for an older woman to leave the skin of her throat uncut.
Men usually think of coercion as a threatened loss of autonomy. For women, coercion often takes a different form: the threat of losing the chance to form bonds with others, be loved, and stay wanted. Men think coercion happens mainly through physical violence, but women see physical suffering as bearable compared with the pain of losing love.
The threat of the loss of love can put someone back in line faster than a raised fist. If we think of women as the ones who will jump through hoops of fire to keep love, it is only because the threat of lovelessness has been used so far against women rather than against men as a form of political crowd control.
Women’s desperation for beauty is derided as narcissism; but women are desperate to hold on to a sexual center that no one threatens to take away from men, who keep sexual identity in spite of physical imperfections and age. Men do not hear in the same way the message that time is running out, and that they will never again be stroked and admired and gratified. Let a man imagine himself living under that threat before he calls women narcissistic. Fighting for “beauty,” many of us understandably believe we are fighting for our lives, for life warmed by sexual love.
With the threat of lost love comes the threat of invisibility. Extreme age shows the essence of the myth’s inequality: The world is run by old men; but old women are erased from the culture. A banned or ostracized person becomes a nonperson. Ostracism and banning are effective, and leave no proof of coercion: no bars, no laws, no guns. South African activist Beyers Naude said on British television that “a banning order can easily lead to people breaking down.” Few can bear being treated as if they are invisible. Women have face-lifts in a society in which women without them appear to vanish from sight.
Face-lifts cause nerve paralysis, infection, skin ulceration, “skin death,” scar overgrowth and postoperative depression. “What a shock!
I looked like a truck had hit me! Swollen, bruised, pathetic…I looked freakish…about this time, I was told, many women begin to cry uncontrollably.” “It’s quite painful afterward, because your jaw feels dislocated. You can’t smile, your face aches…I had terrible yellow bruising and trauma.” “An angry infection…hematoma…a half-circle bruise and three distinct lumps, one the size of a giant jawbreaker…. Now I enjoy putting on makeup!” Those are quotes in women’s magazines from women who have had face-lifts.
I wish I could forget the sight of someone I love lying in St. Vincent’s Hospital, bandages on her eyes smeared with a sulfurous matter. An intravenous tube dripped into a delicate vein. Groggy, her head rolled across the pillow like a blinded calf’s. She could not see the people who cared for her standing awkwardly around her high-railed bed. Down the magnificent cheekbones, over the celebrated mouth, a line of bright blood descended. She seemed to be lying there because she was sick or hurt, but before she entered the hospital, she hadn’t been. She was there because she was less beautiful, some might say, than she used to be.
Women are learning to smile grimly at such tales, because the alternative, we are told, is really intolerable. Old women disappear. Our mothers’ mothers disappeared, their social worth diminished when their child rearing days ended.
But whatever the pressures of the present, the surgical future is one without choice.
Surgical Futures The Victorians’ definition of operable kept expanding. “Moral insanity,” like ugliness, was a “definition that could be altered to take in almost any kind of behavior regarded as abnormal or disruptive by community standards,” writes Elaine Showalter. “Asylums opened for ‘young women of ungovernable temper…sullen, wayward, malicious, defying all domestic control; or who want that restraint over their passions without which the female character is lost.’” So does our definition of operable keep expanding, for the same reasons. In the 1970s, intestinal bypass surgery (in which the intestines are sealed off for weight loss) was invented and it multiplied until, by 1983, there were fifty thousand such operations performed a year. Jaw clamps (in which the jaw is wired together for weight loss) were also introduced in the feminist 1970s, and stomach stapling (in which the stomach is sutured together for weight loss) began in 1976. “As time went on,” reports Radiance, “the criteria for acceptance became looser and looser until now anyone who is even moderately plump can find a cooperative surgeon.” Women of 154 pounds have had their intestines stapled together. Though the doctor who developed it restricted the procedure to patients more than 100 pounds overweight, the FDA approved it for “virtually anyone who wants it.” Intestinal stapling causes thirty-seven possible complications, including severe malnutrition, liver damage, liver failure, irregular heartbeat, brain and nerve damage, stomach cancer, immune deficiency, pernicious anemia, liver failure, and death. One patient in ten develops ulcers within six months. Her mortality rate is nine times above that of an identical person who forgoes surgery; 2 to 4 percent die within days, and the eventual death toll may be much higher. Surgeons “aggressively seek out” patients, and “have no trouble getting patients to sign informed consent forms acknowledging the possibility of severe complications and even death.” One is not surprised by now to learn that 80 to 90 percent of stomach and intestinal stapling patients are female.
At last, all women are operable. Liposuction is the fastest-growing of cosmetic surgeries: 130,000 American women underwent the procedure last year, and surgeons sucked 200,000 pounds of body tissue out of them. According to The New York Times, as we saw, 11 women have died from the procedure. At least 3 more have died since that article was written.
But I would not have known that from the conversations I had with “counselors” when I posed as a prospective client: “What are the risks from liposuction?” “The risks aren’t great. There is always a risk from infection, that is small and a risk from anesthetic, that’s small.” “Has anyone ever died?” “Well, maybe ten years ago, with very obese people.” “Does anyone ever die these days?” “Oh, no.” “What are the risks from liposuction?” “There are no risks, none at all.” “I read that people have died from it.” “Oh God. Where did you read that?” “The New York Times.” “I know nothing about that. I know nothing about The New York Times. I’m sure if that were true it would be making headlines.
They make a fuss over the least little thing.” “Are there any risks involved with liposuction?” “No, no. Generally speaking, no risks involved at all, no, no.
No problem at all, no.” “I read that there have been some deaths.” “Mmm. I have heard something about that. But as long as you’re in the hands of a skilled practitioner, you should have no problem, no problem.” “What are the risks involved with liposuction?” “There is very little risk, very little.” “Does anyone ever die from it?” “I would never think so.” “What are the risks involved with liposuction?” “They’re tiny, very very small. They are very very minimal, whether one million to one or whatever. It’s very simple, there’s very little to go wrong in terms of permanent side effects—very very little to go wrong.” “Is there any risk of death?” “None whatsoever, no, no. I haven’t heard of any complication like that.” You could call death a permanent side effect. You could definitely call it a complication. Stretching a point, you could say risking your life is the least little thing to fuss about, a very very little risk, tiny, very small, very very minimal. Liposuction deaths aren’t real deaths—a comforting thought for the families of the deceased.
The surgeons say that “the benefits far outweigh the risks,” which is a value judgment about the relative importance of their version of “beauty” to that of a woman’s life.
To dwell on the teeny tiny death risk, a surgeon might say, is to overreact: The deaths are a fraction of a percentage of the whole.
Surely—for a medically necessary operation. But for the reconstruction of healthy young women? How many will die before it is too many, before we draw around ourselves a line of safety? Fourteen dead women and counting, each of whom had a name, a home, and a future. And each of whom had healthy concentrations of flesh where fat distinguishes female from male sexual development; for which all the rest had to be staked on the wheel, all gambled for double or nothing and, for these fourteen women, all lost. When is it appropriate to notice blood on a doctor’s hands? Will we go on to twenty? To thirty? To fifty healthy women dead before we feel resistance, before we question the process that has women gamble their lives for a “beauty” that has nothing to do with us? At this rate, those deaths will be just a matter of time.
Liposuction is the fastest-growing procedure in a field that triples every other year. Before this trend escalates until it can never again be considered appropriate, now is the time to stand back and notice fourteen dead bodies, real ones, human ones. Fourteen women dead was enough for Kenya, but not for the United States.
What is liposuction (assuming you live through it)? If you are reading the Poutney Clinic’s brochure, it looks like this: FIGURE IMPROVEMENT BY IMMEDIATE SPOT FAT REDUCTION…. One of the most successful techniques is that developed to refine and reshape the figure. With Lipolysis/Suction assisted Lipectomy a tiny incision is made in each area of excess fat. A very slender tube is then inserted and by gentle, skillful movements aided by a powerful and even suction this unwanted (and often unsightly) fat is removed—permanently.
If you are reading an eyewitness account by journalist Jill Neimark, it looks like this: [A] man force[s] a plastic tube down a naked woman’s throat. He connects the tube to a pump that, for the next two hours, will breathe for her. Her eyes are taped shut, her arms are stretched out horizontally and her head lolls a little to the side…. She’s in a chemically induced coma known as general anaesthesia…what comes next is almost unbelievably violent. Her surgeon, Dr. Leigh Lachman, begins to thrust the cannula in and out, as rapid as a piston, breaking through thick nets of fat, nerves and tissue in her leg. The doctor is ready to stitch her up. Nearly 2,000 millilitres of tissue and blood have been sucked out of her, any more would put her at risk for massive infection and fluid loss leading to shock and death…. He peels the tape back from her lids, and she stares at him, unseeing. “A lot of people have trouble coming back.
Bringing someone out of anaesthesia is the most dangerous part of an operation.”…[which] can lead to massive infection, excessive damage to capillaries and fluid depletion resulting in shock and coma.
Liposuction shows the way to the future: It is the first of many procedures to come for which all women will be eligible by virtue of being women.
Eugenics Women are surgical candidates because we are considered inferior, an evaluation women share with other excluded groups. Nonwhite racial features are “deformities” too: The Poutney Clinic’s brochure offers “a Western appearance to the eyes” to “the Oriental Eyelid,” which “lacks a well-defined supratarsal fold.” It admires “the Caucasian or ‘Western’ nose,” ridicules “Asian Noses,” “Afro-Caribbean Noses (’a fat and rounded tip which needs correction’),” and “Oriental Noses (‘the tip…too close to the face’).” And “the Western nose that requires alteration invariably exhibits some of the characteristics of (nonwhite) noses…although the improvement needed is more subtle.” White women, together with black and Asian women, undergo surgery not as a consequence of selfish vanity, but in reasonable reaction to physical discrimination.
When we examine the language of the Age of Surgery, a familiar degradation process echoes. In 1938, German relatives of deformed infants requested their mercy killings. It was an atmosphere in which the Third Reich stressed, writes Robert Jay Lifton, “the duty to be healthy,” asked its people to “renounce the old individualist principle of ‘the right to one’s own body,”’ and characterized the ill and weak as “useless eaters.” Recall the reclassification process and how it moves, once violence begins, from narrow to wide: The Nazi doctors began by sterilizing people with chronic disabilities, then with minor defects, then “undesirables”; finally, healthy Jewish children were placed in the net because their Jewishness was disease enough. The definition of sick, expendable life soon became “loose, extensive, and increasingly known.” The “useless eaters” were simply put on a “fat-free diet” until they starved to death; they had “already been fed insufficiently and the idea of not nourishing them was in the air.” Remember the characterization of parts of women as already wounded, numb, deformed, or dead. “These people,” the Nazi doctors declared of “undesirables,” “are already dead.” A language that categorized the “unfit” as already less than alive eased the doctors’ conscience: They called them “human ballast,” “life unworthy of life,” “empty shells of human beings.” Remember the use of “health” to rationalize bloodshed; the doctors’ worldview was grounded in what Robert Jay Lifton calls “the healing/killing reversal.” They stressed the therapeutic function of killing deformed and weak children as a means to heal the body politic, “to ensure that the people realize the full potential of their racial and genetic endowment” and “to reverse racial decay.” Remember the trivializing language of the surgeons; when the German doctors culled children by syringe, it was “not murder, this is a putting-to-sleep.” Remember the unqualified surgeons’ bureaucratic obfuscations; the Reich Committee for the Scientific Registration of Serious Hereditary and Congenital Diseases, Lifton writes, “conveyed the sense of a formidable medical-scientific registry board, though its leader…had his degree in agricultural economics…. these ‘observation’ institutions… provided an aura of medical check against mistakes, when in fact no real examination or observation was made.” Medical experimentation was justified on “creatures who, because less than human, can be studied, altered, manipulated, mutilated or killed—in the service…ultimately of remaking humankind.” Remember numbness; both victims and experimenters existed in a state of “extreme numbing,” for in “the Auschwitz atmosphere…any kind of experiment was considered possible.” As Lifton writes: “The doctor…if not living in a moral situation…where limits are very clear…is very dangerous.” Progressive dehumanization has a stark, well-documented pattern.
To undergo cosmetic surgery, one must feel and society must agree that some parts of the body are not worthy of life, though they are still living. These ideas are seeping into the general atmosphere with a nasty stench of eugenics, for the cosmetic surgeon’s world is based on biological supremacy, something Western democracies are not supposed to admire.
The Iron Maiden Breaks Free Women are in jeopardy from our current misunderstanding of the Iron Maiden. We still believe that there is some point where surgery is constrained by a natural limit, the outline of the “perfect” human female.
That is no longer true. The “ideal” has never been about the bodies of women, and from now on technology can allow the “ideal” to do what it has always sought to do: leave the female body behind altogether to clone its mutations in space. The human female is no longer the point of reference.
The “ideal” has become at last fully inhuman. One model points out in Cosmopolitan that “the ideal today is a muscular body with big breasts.
Nature doesn’t make women like that.” And, in fact, women no longer see versions of the Iron Maiden that represent the natural female body.
“Today,” says Dr. Stephen Herman of Albert Einstein College of Medicine Hospital, “I think, almost every popular model has had some type of breast augmentation operation.” “Many models,” another women’s magazine concedes, “now regard a session with the plastic surgeon as part of their job requirement.” Fifty million Americans watch the Miss America pageant; in 1989 five contestants, including Miss Florida, Miss Alaska, and Miss Oregon, were surgically reconstructed by a single Arkansas plastic surgeon. Women are comparing themselves and young men are comparing young women with a new breed that is hybrid nonwoman. Women’s natural attractions were never the aim of the beauty myth, and technology has finally cut the cord. She says, I feel bad about this; he cuts. She says, What about this here; he cuts.
The specter of the future is not that women will be slaves, but that we will be robots. First, we will be subservient to ever more refined technology for self-surveillance, such as the Futurex-5000, or Holtain’s Body Composition Analyzer, a portable fat-analysis machine with infrared light, and a hand-held computer that applies electrical currents through electrodes placed at wrists and ankles. Then, to more sophisticated alterations of images of the “ideal” in the media: “Virtual reality” and “photographic re-imaging” will make “pefection” increasingly surreal. Then, to technologies that replace the faulty, mortal female body, piece by piece, with “perfect” artifice. This is not science fiction: the replacement of women has begun with reproductive technology.
In Great Britain and the United States, research is well under way to develop an artificial placenta, and, according to science writers, “we are now moving into an era when we will have the scientific and technical knowledge to deny women the opportunity to reproduce, or to reproduce only if they use the genetic materials of others.” That is, the technology exists for wealthy white couples to rent the uteri of poor women of any race to gestate their white babies. Since childbirth “ruins” the figure, the scenario of rich women hiring poor ones to do their ungainly reproductive labor is imminent. And cosmetic surgery has given us little reason to doubt that when the technology exists for it, poor women will be pressed to sell actual body material—breasts or skin or hair or fat—to service the reconstruction of rich women, as people today sell their organs and blood. If that seems grotesquely futuristic, cast yourself back just ten years and imagine being told that the invasive alteration on a mass scale of women’s breasts and hips would come to pass so soon.
Technology will continue radically to destabilize the social value of the female body. Products are being developed to predetermine sex, with success rates of 70–80 percent; when such products are available one can expect, based on gender preferences recorded worldwide, that the ratio of women to men will drop precipitously. In the near future, warns one group of scientists, “women could be bred for particular qualities, like passivity and beauty.” Adjustable breast implants are now a reality, allowing women to be adapted for each partner’s preferences. The Japanese have already perfected a lifelike geisha robot with artificial skin.
But the first signs of the mass production of the female body are still the exception; the mass production of the female mind is pervasive.
Women are the drugged sex: Between 1957 and 1967, consumption of psychotropic drugs (sedatives, tranquilizers, antidepressants, appetite reducers) increased by 80 percent, and 75 percent of the drug users are female. By 1979, 160 million prescriptions were written for tranquilizers, over 60 million for Valium alone. Sixty to 80 percent of those prescriptions went to women, and Valium abuse is reported as the most common drug problem that hospital emergency services deal with. Today, in Great Britain and the United States, twice as many women as men take tranquilizers; a scandal in Canada is the overprescribing of tranquilizers to women. In all three countries, women are the main subjects of electroshock treatment, psychosurgery, and psychotropic drugs.
This recent history of woman as pharmaceutical subject sets the stage for “a new era of ‘pharmaceutical cosmetics,’” including Lilly Industries’ antidepressant drug Fluoxetine, awaiting approval by the FDA, which will be marketed as a weight-loss pill. The Guardian reports that another, the adrenalinelike ephedrine, speeds metabolic rate, and a third, DRL26830A, thins subjects down while inducing “transient tremors.” Though of course “there is concern within the pharmaceuticals industry that they could create serious ethical problems,” industry spokesmen are already prepared for “setting the stage for more ‘cosmetic’ rather than medical use.” Women take drugs, one drug agency quoted in the article reports, “in order to be seen as feminine. The ‘feminine’ woman…is slim, passive, deferential to men and ‘does not exhibit emotions such as anger, frustration or assertiveness.’” The new wave of cosmetically directed mood enhancers may solve the problem of women once and for all, as we dose ourselves into a state of perpetual cheerfulness, deference, passivity, and chronically sedated slimness.
Whatever the future threatens, we can be fairly sure of this: Women in our “raw” or “natural” state will continue to be shifted from category “woman” to category “ugly,” and shamed into an assembly-line physical identity. As each woman responds to the pressure, it will grow so intense that it will become obligatory, until no self-respecting woman will venture outdoors with a surgically unaltered face. The free market will compete to cut up women’s bodies more cheaply, if more sloppily, with no-frills surgery in bargain basement clinics. In that atmosphere, it is a matter of time before they reposition the clitoris, sew up the vagina for a snugger fit, loosen the throat muscles, and sever the gag reflex.
Los Angeles surgeons have developed and implanted transparent skin, through which the inner organs can be seen. It is, says one witness, “the ultimate voyeurism.” The machine is at the door. Is she the future?
